---
title: "Power BI"
url: "power-bi"
editor_options: 
  chunk_output_type: inline
date: 2019-01-30
thumbnail: "img/banner/power_bi.png"
categories:
  - "post"
tags: 
  - "visualization"
draft: false
---

## Using Power BI and R

Tutorial here: <a href ="https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/power-bi/desktop-r-scripts" target="_blank">Run R scripts in Power BI Desktop</a>

The only twist that I want to add is an idea on how to enable users without admin access to run R code. 
**This can be achieved by storing a portable r installation on a mountable file storage.**

### R

Download the necessary R installation in order to be able to execute R code.

* <a href="https://sourceforge.net/projects/rportable/" target="_blank">R Portable</a>
* <a href="https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/articles/200534467-Creating-a-Portable-Version-of-RStudio-for-a-USB-Drive
" target="_blank">Portable R Studio</a>

Please note that running RStudio in the cloud gets really slow. I would only use the basic R installation and its GUI to install necessary packages. 

### Azure

Head over to <a href="http://portal.azure.com/" target="_blank">Azure</a>

1. Create Storage Account
2. Create File Storage
3. Configure name, size and get connection string

### Windows

Now you can mount the file storage.  

### Power BI

1. Open the option and select the R installation folder

Note: that there is no pasting option and you have manually select the folder. 


## Columns vs Measures

Calculated columns (and tables) are:

- Evaluated for each row in your table, immediately after you hit 'Enter' to complete the formula
- Saved back into the model so take up space

Calculated Measures are:

- Evaluated when you use it in a visual, when the visual is rendered
- Not saved anywhere (well, actually there's a cache in the report layer but it's not part of the file when you hit Save)

Generally, measures are more useful, but the trade-offs are the performance hit (report runtime vs. pre-processed), storage space, and the type of expressions you can use. For example calculated columns are often used when you want to filter on the result rather than just as a calculated result.

